all right
so let's talk about
adhd and parenting so chat question
number one what is the relationship
between adhd and parenting
so let me put it to you this way
okay
so if i have adhd
if child has adhd
what effect does that have on the parent
and if
a parent
has a particular style
does that affect
the adhd in the kid
right these are kind of the two
questions so like what's the
relationship between adhd and parenting
and the reason that we're going to talk
about this today is because i think that
when we think about illnesses
we tend to think about them in isolation
but the interesting thing is that
they're not really isolated right so
there's a lot about adhd and people
y'all may be surprised by sort of what
we discover we're going to cover a lot
of different literature today
but it's really challenging for parents
to have a child with adhd so i think
this is something that is like under
appreciated that like how hard it is to
be a parent with a child with adhd and
on the flip side how hard it is to be a
child with adhd
who has a parent that doesn't understand
what your needs and cognitive like
limitations or cognitive preferences are
and how that can lead to a lot of
negative impacts in the household
so we're going to start off by so the
goal of today's lecture is to just
explore the relationship between adhd
and parenting okay
so we're going to start off by kind of
defining adhd so sure there's like the
dsm the diagnostic and statistical
manual there's things like the icd-11
we're not going to worry about that kind
of stuff
okay so what we're going to talk about
is like practically what is adhd like
how do you know if you have it if you're
a parent out there what are the signs
that you're going to see in your child
that should make you think a little bit
about adhd and even if they don't have a
clear diagnosis of it if they have these
tendencies
then it may be worthwhile to like
understand some of the stuff later in
the lecture even without a diagnosis
right so remember that adhd is attention
is a spectrum
right so we have like a spectrum of
attention
and so wow that's a terrible bell curve
so let me just fix that
and so even though like we may say that
if your attention is in this area this
is what we qualify as clinical adhd if
your child is within this window
we still can you know this lecture is
still going to be useful for people over
here the other thing that's going to be
kind of interesting is a lot of stuff
that we're talking about even if you're
not a parent but if you have a
significant other who has adhd a lot of
stuff that we're going to be talking
about today will be like really relevant
so if you're up if your partner has adhd
and you're trying to figure out okay
like how should i like interact with
them how should i relate to them what
should be the home environment like
there are things like that that are
actually really important
the flip side of this is that if you are
someone with adhd you may find that
there are a lot of problems in your
relationship that have to do with some
of the stuff that we talk about today so
you can even have you can be the person
with adhd and you can have a
conversation with your parents you can
have a conversation with your
significant other about like some of the
things that's a little bit different um
in your mind and kind of how you work
and stuff like that and how can y'all as
people in a relationship whether it's a
parent-child relationship or a
non-parent child relationship platonic
relationship romantic relationship how
can you understand some of these things
to improve the quality of relationship
so let's start with like what is adhd so
adhd i kind of think about is
attentional problems
and what do i mean by that
so people with adhd oftentimes have
distracted attention
but what trips a lot of parents up or
people in terms of self-diagnosis and
all that good stuff
is that parents will see their kid and
they can like do something
for
hours
without interruption
right and so what what a parent will do
is they'll look at their kid and they'll
say oh well like
you know sure they get distracted easily
and they may have difficulty at school
but like if you give them their
particular book or if they're playing
with legos or they're using an ipad or
like whatever they can do this for hours
and hours and hours without interruption
so remember that adhd is disordered
attention it doesn't necessarily mean a
lack of attention it just means
disordered attention so what we see in
adhd is paradoxically the inability to
be interrupted in some cases
and very like
too easily interrupted in other cases
so normally what we want is an attention
kind of in here but what we'll find with
people with adhd is there are some
symptoms at this end of the spectrum
where they can't
move attention
and so the main main kind of common
element here is that sometimes our
frontal lobes we want to direct our
attention in a particular place
and people who have adhd their frontal
lobes just don't comply as easily so
this could be i need to stop doing this
and start getting to other stuff
or it could be
i need to focus on this one thing and
stop doing other things right so it's
like distraction or inability to to stop
doing
something so just because your kid is
able to play with legos for four hours
at a stretch does not mean that they
don't have adhd in fact if it is very
very hard to get them to stop playing
with legos if they cannot control and
restrain their attention whether that's
from distraction or overly focusing both
of those are consistent with adhd okay
so there are a couple of other things
that are kind of just like
common qualities so one is
difficulty
engaging
in academic work
difficulty with motivation
these are also consistent with adhd so
if we think about what is motivation
right the motivation is the ability to
focus our attention in a particular area
for like
a significant amount of time right so if
i'm motivated to go to the gym what that
means is that my attention is going to
be like okay like let's go to the gym
i'm going to organize things so this is
another thing that we're going to get to
difficulty with
organization
all features of adhd
right so if you have difficulty getting
organized you have difficulty getting
motivated um and remember that too
motivation is it's not a lack of desire
right it's a lack of like being able to
organize your thoughts and move towards
a particular direction in kind of like a
motivated and concerted fashion
so if your kid has these kinds of
challenges then you may want to consider
something along the adhd spectrum so
remember that this is sort of a western
model but in ayurveda we also have vata
right so this is like
uh you guys can watch dr k's guide if
you don't know what kind about that is
for those of you that are familiar with
ayurveda and people who are high on the
vata spectrum will exhibit signs of adhd
right so it's not necessarily that you
need a clinical diagnosis but if for
example
we become more manic if we become you
know drink a bunch of caffeine things
like that there are all kinds of things
that will exacerbate our vata including
technology usage and so as arvata
exacerbates our attention becomes more
flighty
so adhd this is another big thing that i
think sometimes parents will miss is
remember that adhd is not just about
school and work and focus it actually
manifests socially as well
so uh there have been studies that show
that kids with adhd are more likely to
be shy and
withdrawn now you may ask yourself well
why is that like sometimes kids with
adhd are shy and withdrawn until they
discover being a class clown
and now suddenly they know how to become
popular so if your your route to
popularity is to be the class clown and
if you weren't the class clown you
wouldn't know how to interact with other
people in your in your class then you
might have adhd okay
so why are they shy and withdrawn so
this comes down to oftentimes kids with
adhd are neglected by their peers
also very very good data supporting this
okay
and so you may wonder okay well like
what's going on there so remember that
like if you have attentional problems
it's going to be hard for you to attend
to social situations read the room as it
were right like so you don't know like
where people are it may be hard to pay
attention to a conversation they may be
talking about one thing and because your
mind is so flighty you start talking
about something else
you know so all these kinds of like
problems that people with adhd run into
in social situations so this tends to
lead to social isolation withdrawal they
tend to get neglected by peers made fun
of the other flip side of this as well
is that people with adhd remember that
you have disordered attention right so
sometimes people with adhd will talk
about one thing and they won't like read
the room and recognize that people are
not interested in that subject so over
time people will just be like socially
like not too interested in engaging with
an adhd kid and it's super sad
okay so if your kid has these problems
that's another thing to consider
so
the last thing that i'm just going to
kind of touch on
is passive non-compliance
now this is an example of something that
i think is very parent-oriented so you
all may not
this is not something that if you have
adhd you may not really be able to
understand this
but sometimes when you're a parent you
tell your kid what to do
and like sometimes they just ignore you
like and so this can lead to a lot of
frustration on the parents part right so
the parent is like hey go put on your
shoes like time to put on your shoes and
the kid is playing with legos and they
just like completely ignore them
so then what ends up happening is that
the parent like has to raise their voice
right so you get like you like hey put
on your shoes
and so then the kid like snaps out of it
and then they kind of like look over you
and they're like a little bit alarm but
like now they understand so they're
gonna like go put on your shoes so
what's gonna happen in this case so this
is what's called passive non-compliance
so kids with adhd don't listen
okay
and when they don't listen
parents can get frustrated
and then that frustration
leads to
a behavioral change
like raising your voice
and if you do this
they listen
right
so what's going on here
so this is a prime example of how adhd
shapes parenting which we'll see in a
second
and in turn the way that adhd shapes
parenting style
can be damaging to the kid right so this
is like in a nutshell like what we're
gonna talk about today because now
what's happening is you have a parent
that's
like constantly raising their voice so
like now the parent learns like because
your brain is learning too that speaking
softly and politely does not get my kid
to listen and it's time to go and they
need to put on their shoes
so instead what i'm gonna do is just
start barking at my kid all the time
because that's what's effective that's
what they need to listen
the challenge here is that it's not that
they're not listening it's that they're
not hearing right so this is not
defiance so sometimes when you tell your
kid to put on your shoes your kid is
like no i don't want to i want to finish
doing this
that's active non-compliance they know
what they're doing they don't want to do
it they're pushing limits they're
testing boundaries
whatever you want to call it
but with kids with adhd a lot of times
they're not attending to your voice
so their attention is so focused on what
they're doing or so distractible that
they literally do not hear and process
what you're saying so it's an
intentional problem so like and then
what happens is the kid gets kind of
like confused and starts to feel bad
about themselves because mom is always
mom or dad is always yelling at me all
the time right because like i don't
listen
and then the parents can also tell the
kid like you need to listen like like
please listen listen listen listen the
kid is like okay i'm going to try to
listen i'm going to try to listen i'm
going to try to listen but then the
problem is like they feel bad because
like literally that stimulus is not
entering their conscious field their
their brain we have these these
different kinds of attentional circuits
like top-down circuits and bottom-up
circuits i won't go into a bunch of
detail with this but basically your
brain has circuits that like pull your
attention towards something so if i'm
walking down the street and i see a
snake in the middle of the road and i'm
having a conversation with my friend
even though my attention is on the
conversation with my friend there's some
signal processing going on with my
visual cortex that's like hey wake the f
up like stop talking about philosophy
and like there's a snake in front of you
right so we have all these circuits in
our brain that will pull our attention
in a particular place so when a kid has
adhd we see passive non-compliance
because their brain is not attending to
the stimuli so they don't actually like
know that their parent is trying to get
them to do something
okay
so if you've got a kid who has
attentional problems maybe has some
social difficulties is a class clown and
especially as passive non-compliance you
may want to this lecture may apply to
you okay
so now let's kind of move on so what
impact let's go back to our original two
questions okay
so
now we're going to talk a little bit
about
you know if a child has adhd what impact
does it have on parenting and if a
parent has a particular style what
impact does that have on adhd
so as we sort of already illustrated
through our example there is actually a
reciprocal impact so what we see with
parents and kids
is that when you're a parent
you will learn certain coping mechanisms
to get your child to do what they're
supposed to do and that unfortunately a
lot of times those coping mechanisms are
actually somewhat harmful in the long
term and this is what we sort of
see this is what the literature kind of
bears out
so
a couple of interesting tidbits so adhd
in the kid
predicts
family stress
and even
parental depression
so parents of kids with adhd are more
likely to be stressed out and even like
effects like their
how depressed they are okay
we also know that
the severity of adhd
affects
the parenting style
of parents
so this is the way in which the parents
interact with the kids and we'll talk
about this in a second
and in turn we also find this that the
parenting
style affects
severity
of adhd
so what we tend to see is a reciprocal
kind of like bi-directional relationship
that tends to get worse over time until
people figure out what they're supposed
to do right the good news is that all
this can be fixed
so essentially what we see is like adhd
leads to bad parenting
and i recognize that that's kind of
judgmental and stuff but i'll we'll go
into more detail in a second and then
bad parenting actually makes adhd worse
and then this kind of becomes a loop
and eventually
you know just gets worse and worse and
worse and worse and worse to the point
where we can even make predictions about
college performance
based on the like how things were at
home
so like this actually has been measured
in things like grades and stuff like
that like even at the college level
so let's talk a little bit about what
are the different parenting styles
there's been a bunch of research on this
and we're going to go over four
parenting styles
okay
so one the first one is authoritarian
second one is authoritative
third one is permissive
and fourth one is i think overprotective
that's the right yeah
okay
so
what are the ways in which we understand
these parenting styles so one is going
to be
control
one is gonna be warmth
and then we'll just like general notes
okay i'm not gonna fill up this section
too much but this is where a lot of what
i'll talk about
so authoritarian parents have a high
degree of control
actually
just use a symbol
so let's just say
high degree of control and low degree of
warmth so these are parents that are
like harsh they're involved in your life
they're like paying attention to what
you do and things like that they're
gonna make sure you're studying on time
things like that
um
you know but they're not going to be
like
warm and supportive so these parents
tend to be controlling
and punitive
if you don't do this this is going to
happen
you need to do this or else this is
gonna happen you have not demonstrated
to me that you can handle this so i'm
gonna do it for you
right like actions and consequences like
there's like you know they're gonna
teach you like how life works
okay
so authoritarian parenting styles lead
to worsening of adhd symptoms
adhd symptoms lead to more authoritarian
parenting styles right so like let's
just talk about this for a second or
think about this for a second
so if i have a kid who doesn't listen
what i have to end up doing
is like be harsh with them to get them
to listen
so like if if my kid is like playing
with legos and i tell them to put on the
shoes and like they're not putting on
shoes and like i'm like oh sweet darling
sweet child oh my goodness baby it's
time to put on your shoes love come on
darling like let's let's go put on our
shoes and the kid is like going to
continue playing legos
and so i'm like hey
it's time to put on shoes
right and so the kid feels a little bit
hurt
and then they start crying and then like
i say like i've been i told you three
times
and you haven't listened
i've told you like three times to do
this and you're not listening so then
daddy gets upset
right so this is an authoritarian
parenting style
the authoritative parenting style
actually has high control and high
warmth
so these are parents that are
structured
and supportive
this is basically the best parenting
style there are studies that show that
authoritative parents
actually do well in terms of like kids
substance use
so
child substance use is like
the worst with permissive parents
and the best with authoritative parents
so they provide like structures and
boundaries but they're kind of like warm
and emotionally supportive
okay
um
so like these are parents that i think
of as is so a couple of other notes so
these are people with high expectations
with
little support
so this is another like key aspect of
authoritarian parents so you can think
about tiger parents as like being in
this category right where they expect a
lot from you but like if you get a b
they're not gonna be like okay let's sit
down and like think a little bit about
what's going on and like why you gotta
be and like how can we help you like are
you struggling is do you need glasses
like they don't care about that right
authoritarian parents are gonna be like
you need to get an a
i don't care how you figure out it out
right so they're not very supportive but
they're like demanding and they have
high expectations
so authoritative parents are a little
bit different
so they are they they set limits
uh set limits
with emotional support
right so it's like you need to get an a
but like i understand things are okay so
like tell me like why you know what's
hard what's going on like is something
going on in your life that seems out of
character let me understand like help me
understand like what's going on with you
like why aren't you getting an a like is
there something i need to know about
what can i do to help you still need to
get an a like we're not going to not let
you get an a so we need to correct that
behavior and at the same time i can be
like emotionally supportive while doing
so
okay
next parent is permissive which is low
control and high warmth this is the cool
parent
right
so these people are great because
they're emotionally supportive
but
few boundaries
few limitations or boundaries
right so this is the parent who's kind
of like
yeah i'm sorry you got a b honey like
it'd really be nice if you got an a but
you know like do you promise me that
you'll study harder okay i love you
darling
do really good okay mommy's like mommy
loves you no matter what
like daddy daddy loves you no matter
what
and you promise me you're gonna do
better right okay i'm glad we had this
talk
go play your nintendo
go ahead it's okay
i know you're gonna do it
right so that's a permissive parenting
style
then we've got the overprotective
parenting style so this too can be like
sorta high control
and then the warmth is kind of weird
so it's i would call kind of call this
like
overt warmth overtly high and covertly
low
so these are like like
overprotective parents tend to restrict
autonomy
of the kid um
tend to be like
physically
or psychologically controlling
and tend to encourage dependence
right so if you can't like if you can't
get an a like let me go ahead and like
arrange a tutor for you and i'm gonna do
this for you and i'm gonna do that for
you because you can't do it yourself so
like daddy your mommy is gonna take over
and like you need to do really well but
like i'm gonna be there for you okay you
don't need to learn how to drive at the
age of 16. mommy or daddy are going to
be there for you if you drive there are
drunk drivers on the road we can't trust
your friends like they could drive drunk
so i don't want you driving i don't want
you under their influences mom and dad
are going to drive you everywhere
oh that's wonderful you want to go on a
date you have a you have a boyfriend now
that's fantastic mommy's so proud of you
for having your boyfriend i'm gonna
drive you to your date you're gonna sit
at this table i'm gonna sit at that
table i won't bother you at all i
promise and then when you're done with
your little date mommy and daddy will
drive you home
okay
so these are overprotective parents
so we tend to see in adhd
so this is where things get kind of
interesting
so
people have done studies looking at ages
three
six
and nine
and what they tend to find is that the
worse the adhd is
especially at this phase
less so at three-year-olds when you have
high adhd this leads to increased
authoritarian parenting
okay
when you have also between these ages
when you have high authoritarian
parenting
this leads to worse adhd
okay so it seems like between the ages
of three and six there isn't too much
change
um so it seems like starting at the age
of six and i would even say just six
plus because you see this stuff at like
college
ages and stuff like that too
we see a lot of bi-directional effects
so worse adhd leads to worsening
authoritarian kind of parenting and then
authoritarian parenting leads to
exacerbation of symptoms of adhd
so it tends to be there are a couple of
other interesting dynamics here so it
seems like there are gender effects here
too
where um for example
let me just make sure i have this
correct
so
uh
female kids here's just examples of
different things okay
are more sensitive
this is going to be a packed sentence
okay
too
low
authoritative
mothers
so this is where when we get into like
the super specifics of the research
we're looking at like different
variables right so what this basically
means
is that if you're a if you're a a girl
and you have a mom who is not very
authoritative right authoritative is the
good one
um right so
uh hold on oh no sorry yeah
authoritative is the good one
so if you have uh if you're a female kid
who has a low authoritative mother a
mother who does not provide you with
structure and emotional support your
adhd is likely to be like way worse than
a male kid
right so this is where it's just
interesting but as we start looking at
these different variables we start to
see different sorts of
effects on kids so for example
dad's
parenting style has more of an effect
between the ages of three to six than
mom's parenting style so there are other
kinds of interesting just sort of like
semi-random
gender effects that we tend to see like
dads seem to be more impactful from the
the ages of three to six than moms are
female kids with moms that have low
authoritative
parenting styles tend to have like we're
not necessarily saying that they're high
authoritarian right so do you all
understand that there's like a
difference there
you can be low on one and high on the
other but it's really the variable is
low authoritative that that girls tend
to be sensitive to later in life
there are all kinds of specific effects
we'll give you guys a list of the the
resources and stuff you guys can read
the papers yourself if you want to okay
so different kinds of effects here
and so
this is the there's a key
finding here that's really important so
then what people did is they they looked
at these different effects right and
they saw this reciprocal kind of
relationship and then so what then
researchers started doing
is intervening
so researchers started asking the
question okay
if we move from an authoritarian
to an authoritative
right so this one is
controlling
this one is structured
and supportive just to give you guys an
example like a reminder right because i
know the terms are similar
so they did is if we train parents
in moving from authoritarian to
authoritative
what happens and the cool thing that
they discovered is that adhd improves
so if you alter the way in which you
parent
you can actually affect the adhd of your
child
and this correlates with all kinds of
stuff okay so it correlates with like
improved academic performance
improved ability to like meet goals
improved social outcomes so if you like
literally change the way in which you
parent your child's adhd will improve
now there's another really really key
key key
finding here which is fascinating
is that when researchers when you change
the parenting style
the inattention
does
not
improve
but
grades
improve
okay so now this gets a little bit
complicated
but i'm going to try to explain this
so when we measure a kid with adhd
they're like tests that we can do to see
how their attention functions like how
long can you read this
boring paragraph for example before your
eyes start wandering
and then there's other things that we
measure as well
which is like not just like your
attention at a task
but outcomes like what happens to your
grades what happens to your social
situation what happens to your sense of
depression your self-worth all these
kinds of things and we we we've assumed
as a psychiatric industry we've assumed
that increasing attention
is the mechanism
to improve grades
right
so then what we do is psychiatrists is
we prescribe stimulants
and what we're going to do is we're
going to give you a pill that will
improve your attention therefore we will
increase the grade
and so stimulants lead to
improved grades right that's what
psychiatry believes
but what parenting studies actually show
is really fascinating is the fundamental
attentional stuff does not improve their
ability to pay attention to a paragraph
does not seem to get better
but what does improve is the grades
and this is a really really really
important finding because what this
suggests is that
fixing the attention doesn't
automatically fix everything downstream
in fact providing the right kind of
parenting style
is sufficient to improve your grades
without fixing the attention with
stimulants
right so what this actually means is
that like you don't need stimulants like
you can actually i mean you may need
depending on your clinical situation
but this fundamental like assumption
that psychiatry has that stimulants are
what you need
appears to actually not be not true that
you can actually
teach parents how to parent properly and
parent their child appropriately with
adhd and the kids outcomes will improve
despite the fact that you're not
altering their neurochemistry
so then the question naturally becomes
what's the relationship between
stimulants and parenting and this is
what's really fascinating
when you give a kid a stimulant
it decreases authoritarian parenting
so this is fascinating
incredibly fascinating
right so when a kid is on a stimulant
and they're able to attend a little bit
better
the parent actually needs to yell less
they're able to like you know attend to
the parent more so the parent doesn't
enter go into this cycle over here
right so once you once you fix the
stimulant this goes away so then this
goes away and this goes away they just
start by listening
and so it's kind of like really
interesting there right
and so this is kind of what we sort of
learn which is that at the end of the
day the way in which you parent your
child will actually affect their adhd
symptoms
will in turn affect your own mental
health if you kind of parent them
appropriately and will lead to better
outcomes for their kid for your kid so
then everyone's going to be asking
so if you guys want to see um let's just
look at a couple of these papers real
quick okay
so uh let me see what's something that's
kind of digestible
um let me just look let me show you guys
if you guys just want to
we'll put include these references
hopefully somewhere but i'll just flash
them here so you guys can look at the
vod so here's one of the papers that we
looked at
maternal parenting style and
internalizing and adhd symptoms in
college students
these studies are actually really cool
by the way
parenting is a mechanism of change in
psychosocial treatment for youth with
adhd
right so like that's exploring the
mechanism of change
when you
adjust your parenting
um
a longitudinal study of the relation
between family functioning and preschool
adhd symptoms so these are like papers
looking at college students and
preschool
okay
family impact and parenting styles and
in families of children with adhd so
this is a great paper that just kind of
talks about it all
and then this is the one that we're
gonna i think talk about
now
for a second so examining differences oh
no wait hold on i'm missing one
huh
there we go this is the one i'm missing
so mindfulness for children with adhd
and mindful parenting mind champ a
qualitative study on the feasibility
effects so this is a study that looks at
actually an intervention where they
taught parents the mind champ program
right so this i don't know if you all
are aware of this but mine champ is an
evolution of the pog champ emote
which has now been banned i understand
right
so we need to mine champion
petition twitch chat
so now what everyone is going to be
asking is
um
okay so oh
there we go
so what everyone's going to be asking is
like if you're a parent or you're a kid
and you're trying to figure out or
you're a romantic partner or whatever
platonic friend
you know how do i parent properly
so there's a lot of different stuff that
people have measured
right to see
what are the key things that determine
whether someone like is doing a good job
of parenting or not good job of
parenting what are the things that are
important
so the first is to be structured
instead of
reactive
so let me actually do it this way
is greater than reactivity
what does that mean
so
i'll give you guys a story from my my
personal life
so i have a kid who's like super high
vata and what i've found is that like
getting her ready for school in the
morning can be a five minute process
that is easy and simple or it can be a
half hour process with a lot of like
frustration and yelling and like
you know things like that so what i find
is that when i'm you know have a hive at
that child what i have to do is be like
super super structured about it so for
example like we get her clothes ready we
get her toothbrush ready we get all of
her stuff ready and it's placed in the
bathroom whereas in the past what we
would do is like we'd brush our teeth in
one place we'd go to the closet to get
dressed we'd then like go get our socks
because we keep our socks and shoes like
you know by the door and then we'd put
on our shoes and like so it's like a
multi jet like it's like there's phase
one is brushed teeth and go potty phase
two is moved to location number two and
put on clothes and phase three is like
put on socks shoes and coat and what i
find is that each time there's a
transition her attention can wander and
she'll like start playing with something
if she starts playing with something
then i have to like react to it right
and then i'll also get frustrated i'll
be like oh my god like she like she
feels like a fish that's gotten like
loose from the net and then she'll just
like run away and do whatever she wants
to
okay
and so what we want to end up doing is
being as structured as possible so this
is where like we get the clothes the
toothbrush we close the door to the
bathroom and we're not leaving the
bathroom until we have our coat socks
toothbrush you know teeth brushed wet
potty change clothes put on socks and
coat right there and then we're going to
leave the bathroom and then we'll put on
our shoes right by the door on the way
out
so you want to be as structured as
possible and try to be as
as non-reactive as possible
second thing
impose limits
without emotion
this is a key one okay
so you want to set boundaries like by
all means you want to set boundaries the
problem or even enforce boundaries the
problem is that oftentimes parents will
impose those limits or set boundaries or
enforce boundaries when they themselves
are pissed
and so like this is it's hard for a kid
because first of all they're doing
something wrong but when you're yelling
at them like they may learn because
they're going to be learning like their
limbic system will be active and it'll
be teaching them lessons but there's
going to be like negative impacts to
self-worth
is going to go down
right like they know that you're angry
with them
so they're going to like feel bad
you're you're going to be angry with
yourself
right because you're yelling at your kid
and you don't want to be yelling at your
kid
so as best as possible
try to set limits without being
emotional right and this is where we
have to be super super careful because
this translates into a weird thing
sometimes where parents are like i'm not
supposed to be emotional with my kids so
i'm gonna i'm gonna talk like this i'm
not gonna be emotional at all no
emotions
child you have been a bad child today
therefore i'm going to have to take away
your toy no angry no yelling no emotion
right
so sometimes parents will do this
where there's another version of this
that i've heard
historically and recently which is like
yeah we don't punish our kids because
punishment is bad we should use positive
reinforcement
and then they'll say things like okay so
like we're not going to do timeout
because timeout is a punishment we're
going to take a break
or we're going to do something else
right
and so they'll use this weird language
and what they end up doing is like
punishing the kid they just don't call
it a punishment
right it's like super weird and that
screws kids up even more like so i had a
patient got so screwed up it's like nuts
where the parents like would never
punish the kid because they were super
into like not punishing kids
so instead what would happen is oh like
you're acting out
the reason you're acting out is because
you ate i kid you not gluten
and so since you're acting out this is
the gluten's fault it's not your fault
because heaven forbid we're not going to
punish you there's nothing wrong with
you you are the perfect child it is the
gluten that's causing the problem
because it's it flaring up your ibs
therefore wait for it wait for it wait
for it no cupcakes
you're acting out therefore it's the
gluten's fault therefore no cupcakes and
the kid gets like super confused right
because
they see the acting out and they see the
removal of the cupcake they just can't
handle like and then it gets really
weird because if you're punishing a kid
but you don't call it punishment that
screws up the kid more than just
punishing them than calling them
punishment
you'll get that
like if you're punishing a kid just let
at least be authentic about it and be
honest about it because then the kid
winds up in my office i kid you not no
pun intended
and then they've got this weird
relationship with like food
because of this
and every time that something bad
happens so they're like dating someone
and they feel emotionally hurt and they
start blaming the cupcakes and it's like
then i have to do the work of rewiring
this person's brain and it's like no
you're not feeling bad because of the
gluten
you're feeling bad because your your
partner was emotionally unsupportive it
didn't like respond to your texts
right and so like you get this like so
if you're gonna punish your kid like
punish your kid try to do it without
emotion now this is the other key thing
without emotion does not mean
suppressing your emotions so you have a
monotone child you have misbehaved
therefore i'm going to set a limit on
you without emotion no emotion no
elevated voice nothing no i'm calm i'm
collected i'm i am good and you my
friend are screwed
but with no emotion
this is not actually no emotion so this
is the other thing that parents tend to
do is when we say do something without
emotion they think what that means is
suppress the emotion
but here's the thing and we see this a
lot with toddlers right
toddlers like know maybe like 50 words
they're like two-year-olds right so when
you don't use the language of emotion
i mean a punishment sorry and like you
don't display like
if you don't like overtly punish them
they're very very attuned to you
emotionally and empathically so you can
act like you're not emotional but a
two-year-old will absolutely understand
exactly what you're feeling because
that's all they've got to work with
right they don't have vocabulary they
don't have logic they don't understand
reasoning all they can do is like read
your facial expression and understand
that like mommy and daddy are like not
happy with me and i kind of screwed up
and then you tell your kid no no you
didn't screw up this is not a punishment
you didn't screw up and then the kid
gets super confused and they're like
what and then they wind up in my office
right
so you're damn right two-year-olds read
your mind that's exactly what they do
because that's all they know how to do
because they don't have words they don't
have language they don't have logic so
all they have to do is like super high
empathic circuitry
okay
it's kind of bizarre they're like very
very attuned to things
and it's like you can change your facial
expression like make a kid cry like
super easily because that's all they've
got to work with they've got no history
no context all they can do is like read
your facial expression it's like 100
like they'll read exactly what's going
on
okay
so as a parent like what should you do
right so you want to impose limits
without emotion and if you say okay well
that how do i impose limits without
emotion this is where like you process
emotions
so if you're feeling angry with your kid
you've got to like kind of work through
that yourself okay
so there's a couple of things that are
important here so one is like awareness
of your emotions
this is what you should do if you're a
parent right so how do we get here we
get here by doing this
so like what are you feeling okay i'm
feeling frustrated like acknowledge that
right and you can even acknowledge it to
your kid you can say
hey daddy is feeling kind of frustrated
with you right now and i'm going to do
my best to set that aside i really don't
want to be frustrated with you and
daddy's working on that
i really need you to put on your shoes
and i'm sorry if i'm saying that in a
way that hurts your feelings like can
you please do that for daddy you just
say that
right
and then you can ask them hey
was is the way that daddy's talking to
you does it make you feel bad
okay let me give you a hug right so like
you can be frustrated but you don't want
to impose the limit with that
frustration it's like it's like that
simple
right it's not necessarily easy to learn
how to talk like that but like you can
acknowledge your emotions to your child
and like kind of check in with them
so as a parent you want awareness of
your emotions
okay
second thing is you yourself need to be
like careful about being as non-reactive
and making sure you're emotionally
regulated
right so this kind of goes back to now
i'm using some of the language of the
research paper so this is like
processing your own emotions so you can
cultivate like
detachment so this is like our hg bread
and butter stuff so the cool thing about
paying attention to hg
is that we will make you better parents
whether you realize it or not because
we're teaching you all to be detached
right we're teaching you all to like
understand your emotions we're teaching
you to be less lexithemic
another big thing is acceptance
and so this too is like related to this
right
so you got to kind of just accept
that
like some of this stuff isn't gonna be
perfect right so whether i like if my
kid is like late for school yelling at
them is not gonna make a difference
like they're late so we can definitely
have a conversation about it
we can impose some kind of uh punishment
or whatever but like you as a parent can
accept that things are just not gonna be
perfect and so if we think about like
acceptance like which parenting style
does not enjoy acceptance at all which
parenting style is the hallmark of a
lack of acceptance
do you all remember
ah yes
the authoritarian parenting style or
acceptance is the enemy
right
acceptance is exactly what we want to
avoid like we don't want to accept our
kid for who they are like screw that we
want our kid to be what we want them to
be
screw acceptance
acceptance leads to subpar results
and this is the really sad thing is that
is actually like not true
in fact the opposite right what we tend
to discover through research is that
actually like accepting your kid for
where they're at and still sort of
imposing limits and boundaries and
structure
with love is actually the way to go
so as a parent you want to be structured
instead of reactive so if you've got a
kid with adhd
don't give them opportunities to get
distracted
right so you want to like not have to
respond and chase them around this is
what drives parents absolutely crazy
because then you're chasing your kid
around all the time
you're stressed out you get frustrated
what should take five minutes is now
taking half an hour you don't have your
own time to take care of yourself so
self-care is actually another important
part
something that parents
woefully neglect
is like taking care of themselves
because if you are calm cool and
collected
you will do a better job of taking care
of your your kids
and this is what we've seen in our
parent program is like we'll give our
our parents like we'll teach them
communication skills we'll teach them
how to set boundaries and stuff like
that but a big part of what we do for
parents is actually emotional support
and this is where like you know we get
them in a room together we talk about
okay what's like what's it like for you
having a kid who's addicted to video
games
it's like terrifying right like they're
scared they're scared that their child
is like their kid is like 19 years old
they failed their first year of college
and the parent is terrified they're like
what if i can't control this like what
if this continues they're gonna be
homeless like what's gonna happen to
them once i pass away like if they're
not able to take care of themselves they
have all this fear
rolling around inside of them and then
anytime they have a conversation
it's gonna like show up with the kid
right so we actually had this case
yesterday where someone was sharing with
me that you know the parent was
concerned about their kid they said like
i i'm worried about what's gonna happen
to you when i'm gone
and that's a devastating thing to share
with a child like the kid can't handle
that emotional that because they know
you're right like they know you're right
if you're a parent who has enabled your
child
and you have like a man-child for a kid
or a woman child for a kid and like you
do like their laundry and stuff like and
you worry about what's gonna happen and
that's a completely valid worry that is
gonna terrify your kid because they know
it's true they know that once you leave
like they they're like they're old
enough to understand they don't do their
laundry they don't pay their bills they
don't have a job so if you're a kid like
that like it's terrifying to face that
reality that your parent isn't gonna be
there one day and then that negative
emotion that the kid deals with in turn
is gonna shatter their motivation
it's not gonna like scare them straight
it's gonna like that's what drives them
to the game in the first place
and then like they get driven to the
game and like now they retreat because
like their life is going nowhere when
your parent is like by the way your life
is going nowhere and the kid is like
yeah i know they lash out at the parent
and they retreat to the video game and
then the cycle perpetuates
right so how do you do this you take
care of your own emotions as a parent
somewhere else you take care of yourself
you do what you need to
if you need that glass of zinfandel on
thursday at 4 pm you go for it right
i don't actually recommend that because
using alcohol as a coping mechanism is a
bad idea
let's say if you need your bath
on a sunday morning
you go for it
okay
so this is adhd and parenting to
summarize
it's kind of interesting because a lot
of people wonder what's the relationship
between parenting and adhd right so if
like if i have an adhd kid do i need to
parent differently the answer is
absolutely yes
for kids with adhd you may wonder you
know like
what is my parents impact on my
adhd and the interesting thing is that
it appears that children with adhd
stress their parents out and result in
changes in parental behavior which in
turn those changes in parental behavior
lead to worsening and adhd symptoms and
it's absolutely a bi-directional effect
and so i'm not trying to share this with
you all for the purpose of like you know
blaming your parents and being like you
screwed me up now i'm failing out of
college because you didn't parent me
well enough and i don't want the parents
to feel guilty because they're like oh i
screwed up because if i'd been a more
authoritative parent instead of an
authoritarian parent then my kid would
be like getting a 4.0 in college that's
not the point of this the point of this
and those feelings can come up and
they're actually quite natural the point
is even if that does come up like the
two we all have a relationship
and the child needs to acknowledge that
hey maybe if you did things differently
like life would be easier for me
and at the same time like child also
needs to acknowledge that like i can't
really blame you for this because it's
not like anyone teaches you this stuff
right so it's sort of like not the
parent's fault and then you guys can
start building bridges from where you
are now right as a parent you can
acknowledge that maybe if you knew more
about this like you would have done a
better job and you wouldn't have like
put your kid in the situation they're in
so you can apologize that for as a
parent as a kid you can forgive them if
you both admit to like what what the
situation is and then you guys can be on
the same team like there's like avoiding
making mistakes is not the way that you
build a relationship you acknowledge the
mistake you forgive people for the
mistake and even then it's the child's
place to say if they're kind of mature
about it they're gonna say like actually
i can't really blame you for that but i
appreciate the apology i don't hold it
against you and i'm but i'm glad you
know you're accepting responsibility but
i don't blame you at all i love you very
much
let's work on it now like that's what
we're looking for at the end right
so at the end of the day though adhd in
parenting is super tricky and the good
news is that if you adjust your
parenting style you can actually affect
the the symptoms of adhd
so this is where being more
authoritarian be being more structured
and emotionally supportive as opposed to
disciplinarian or controlling or
permissive where you let the adhd kid do
whatever they want to
or where you let them like you're
overprotective and you start doing
things for them because parents will
like default to any of those things
right
either i'm going to yell at you i'm just
going to do it for you
because you've got adhd and you can't do
it yourself
i'm gonna just like
i'm done with this i like i don't know
what to do about this
throw your hands up and let your kid do
whatever he wants to so the permissive
overprotective or authoritarian style
those are all non-ideal
the challenge the challenging thing is
that the authoritative style which is
kind of the right move is difficult it's
hard it requires self-care on the part
of the parent it requires awareness on
the part of the parent it requires like
acceptance
it requires being thoughtful and like
building in structure and trying to not
be as reactive as possible and
processing your own emotions so it's
hard but the good news is that you can
alter that
so if you're someone in a relation if
you've got adhd and you see this kind of
stuff in your parents
recognize that some of what your
self-esteem is
may not be because your parents are
actually like think you're crap but like
some of those emotions which even if you
know your parents love you those
emotions are coming from experiences
where your parents had to react because
they didn't know any better
and similarly if you're in a romantic
relationship now or platonic
relationship now understand that
structure and non-reactivity will help
the relationship right so you can
implement these from any which way
questions
can could you talk about how the
relationship changes when
when the parent has adhd as well
is it's quite genetic yeah absolutely
so if a parent not only adhd
but when a parent has any kind of
psychopathology it leads to worsening
symptoms in the kid
okay
so like you can have a parent with
anxiety that'll lead to worsening
symptoms with adhd
there's also
uh
so adhd is not the only illness that
we examined i mean i'm not going into
all the detail because that's you know
so for example this paper looked at not
only adhd but oppositional defined
disorder depression and anxiety
i think there's some paper that looks at
ocd too
and then there's like there's plenty of
data let me see if i can find if one of
these references i mean i read more than
this
um let me see if there's a parenting
nope
yeah so you can also look at this paper
which looks at
um let me see if i can find this real
quick so there's like family stress
here we go
you ready for it man i'm good sometimes
i gotta say
dr k is good
to remember where the paragraph is in
which paper like sometimes i i'm proud
of myself
so parent adhd symptoms um
so
using a four-point likert scale if a
parent responded two or three for
symptoms okay
uh
so this paper did look at
um parent adhd
so this is the paper a longitudinal
study of the relationship between family
functioning and preschool adhd symptoms
so let me see if i can find
the result
okay so this is going to be
a bit complicated so i'll try to find
this for you all okay
um i don't know here we go
this is the paper that this is the one
we want
so this looks at the impact of for
example maternal depression
right so we can see what the impact is
these are statistically significant we
can look at parental
yeah uh
so they don't have they're not looking
at
one of these is not summarized
so you can look at like maternal life
stress you know seems to have a negative
correlation
with
adhd
let's look at depression and anxiety i
think that's what we want
actually
right and the key thing here is that
maternal depression or paternal
depression is going to have an impact on
the adhd
um
and then that impact changes based on
which category of kid you're talking
about
and if you guys look here
it looks like the impact from mothers is
greater than fathers but the short
answer is that adhd for parents will
absolutely affect the adhd of the child
and it's not just
adhd and parents right so there's
evidence that for example being an
overprotective parent
increases the anxiety of your child
there are even studies that show that
giving parents anti-anxiety medication
if they have an anxiety disorder has a
clinical benefit in the kid
so when you are an anxious parent who is
overprotective you will pass on that
anxiety to the kid and if you medicate
yourself or get treatment yourself that
will result in your kid having less
anxiety
so but what should adhd kids say to a
single parent to describe uh to them
what's happening especially if a parent
thinks you're just trying to change them
in a negative way
my mom tends to blame me for everything
but not to accept that i'm in the adhd
spectrum
so that's a really tough question but a
really good question so i would start by
having in like open-ended conversation
with your parents so start to ask them
so like take a particular example
like if you had some kind of conflict
let's say you didn't take out the trash
and your mom gets upset with you and you
can sort of ask her like
how do you see this situation like what
do you think is going on here
right and she'll say like oh like you're
just
you know
you're criticizing me like maybe they'll
perceive any kind of conversation as a
criticism that can happen so this is
what's really tricky
is that
if parents know they're doing a bad job
and you try to bring up to them that
things are not ideal
that suppressed thought of i'm doing a
bad job comes roaring back and they push
back against it right so there's
suppressive mechanisms that like that
are pushing down the thought that i'm
screwing up because that is the most
devastating thought to a parent right if
your parent loves you you can get some
really bizarre behavior because if i'm
screwing up as a parent and i love my
kid like that's terrifying i can't i
can't deal with that so what i do is i
suppress that and then what happens is i
end up getting hypersensitive to any
kind of criticism of my parenting
because deep down i am insecure about it
right it's just like any other
insecurity if i'm afraid i'm an idiot
then what i need is a thousand people to
tell me i'm smart every single day
and if a single person calls me an idiot
i'm gonna push back against them so hard
so this is where it's like uh like you
know having a gentle conversation with
them where if they start to get
defensive you can sort of ask what are
you hearing me say are you hearing me
say that i that you're a bad parent you
can just ask them that question
and then you can even tell them i'm not
saying that i'm just saying that we have
a conflict and i'm trying to figure out
how we can work through this conflict
i don't believe i'm 100 at fault i don't
believe you're 100 at fault in fact two
people cannot be at fault individually
but when you have a relationship
there's going to be some kind of
friction that occurs because you've got
more than one human
so i just like to explore with you like
what do you think is going on like in
our relationship why do you think these
conflicts keep happening
let's try to understand it because i
love you and i want to have a healthy
relationship with you and sometimes
relationships need a little bit of work
what do you think about that
right so you can try things like that
but that's super challenging like
generally speaking you you know if
you've got a defensive kind of like
suppressing parent and you're a kid with
adhd it's hard to do that
what you could also do is send them this
lecture and just use that as a backdrop